Add Routing Traffic to Your Application Guide (#991)
nginxinc/nginx-kubernetes-gateway: docs/guides/directing-traffic-to-your-app.md

# Directing Traffic to Your Application

In this guide, you will learn how to direct external traffic to your Kubernetes applications using the Gateway API and
NGINX Kubernetes Gateway. Whether you're managing a web application or a REST backend API, you can use NGINX Kubernetes
Gateway to expose your application outside the cluster.

## Prerequisites

- NGINX Kubernetes Gateway is [installed](/docs/installation.md) on your cluster.
- [Expose NGINX Kubernetes Gateway](/docs/installation.md#expose-nginx-kubernetes-gateway) and save the public IP
  address and port of NGINX Kubernetes Gateway into shell variables:

   ```text
   GW_IP=XXX.YYY.ZZZ.III
   GW_PORT=<port number>
   ```

## The Application

The application we are going to use in this guide is a simple coffee application comprised of one Service and two Pods:

![coffee app](/docs/images/direct-all-traffic-app.png)

With this architecture, the coffee application is not accessible outside the cluster. We want to expose this application
on the hostname `cafe.example.com` so that users outside the cluster can access it.

> To do this, we will install NGINX Kubernetes Gateway and create two Gateway API resources: a Gateway and an HTTPRoute.

Reviewer: Yep... might sound cleaner to have it at the end, but if we don't immediately explain it, it might be good to hyperlink the two object names to the corresponding page on the Kubernetes Gateway API page.

    metadata:
      labels:
        app: coffee
    spec:
      containers:
      - name: coffee
        image: nginxdemos/nginx-hello:plain-text
        ports:
        - containerPort: 8080
---
apiVersion: v1
kind: Service
metadata:
  name: coffee
spec:
  ports:
  - port: 80
    targetPort: 8080
    protocol: TCP
    name: http
  selector:
    app: coffee
EOF
```

This will create the coffee Service and a Deployment with two Pods. Run the following command to verify the resources
were created:

```shell
kubectl get pods,svc
```

Your output should include 2 coffee Pods and the coffee Service:

```text
NAME                          READY   STATUS      RESTARTS   AGE
pod/coffee-7dd75bc79b-cqvb7   1/1     Running     0          77s
pod/coffee-7dd75bc79b-dett3   1/1     Running     0          77s

NAME                 TYPE        CLUSTER-IP      EXTERNAL-IP   PORT(S)   AGE
service/coffee       ClusterIP   10.96.75.77     <none>        80/TCP    77s
```

## Application Architecture with NGINX Kubernetes Gateway

To direct traffic to the coffee application, we will create a Gateway and HTTPRoute. The following diagram shows the
configuration we'll be creating in the next step:

> ![Configuration](/docs/images/direct-all-traffic-config.png)

Author: I chose `*/*` because it matches the symbol in this guide: https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/guides/simple-gateway/

> ![Configuration](/docs/images/direct-all-traffic-config.png)

Reviewer 2: I see. I guess it means "any hostname/any path". Would it make sense to rewrite it a little?
```
Host: *
Path: *
```

We need a Gateway to create an access point for HTTP traffic coming into the cluster. The `cafe` Gateway we are going to
create will open an access point to the cluster on port 80 for HTTP traffic.

To direct HTTP traffic from the Gateway to the coffee Service, we need to create an HTTPRoute named `coffee` and attach
to the Gateway. This HTTPRoute will have a single routing rule that directs all traffic to the
hostname `cafe.example.com` from the Gateway to the coffee Service.

Once NGINX Kubernetes Gateway parses the `cafe` Gateway and `coffee` HTTPRoute, it will configure its dataplane, NGINX,

> to route all HTTP requests to `cafe.example.com` to the Pods that the `coffee` Service targets:

Reviewer: What's the different between "routing" and "direct" here?

> ![Traffic Flow](/docs/images/direct-all-traffic-flow.png)

Reviewer 2: better to use `clients`, not `users`, because `users` would typically mean NKG users.

> ![Traffic Flow](/docs/images/direct-all-traffic-flow.png)

Reviewer 2: I suggest replacing 'http://cafe.example.com' with 'XXX.YYY.ZZZ.III` because the NKG exposed via that API.

We can annotation the arrow from clients to public endpoint with `http://cafe.example.com` to add more context.

Author: Changed to Public IP Address and kept the hostname in the box based on this discussion: https://github.com/nginxinc/nginx-kubernetes-gateway/pull/993#discussion_r1300677827

Reviewer 2: Can we drop "http://" prefix ? For example, we can have "Public IP Address for cafe.example.com" - since http is not involved in converting hostname to IP. I think it is a little confusing with http:// prefix

We specify a listener on the Gateway to open an access point on the cluster. In this case, since the coffee application
accepts HTTP requests, we create an HTTP listener, named `http`, that listens on port 80.

By default, Gateways only allow routes (such as HTTPRoutes) to attach if they are in the same namespace as the Gateway.
If you want to change this behavior, you can set
the [`allowedRoutes`](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/references/spec/#gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1beta1.AllowedRoutes)
field.

Now, let's create the HTTPRoute by copying and pasting the following into your terminal:

```yaml
kubectl apply -f - <<EOF
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1beta1
kind: HTTPRoute
metadata:
  name: coffee
spec:
  parentRefs:
  - name: cafe
  hostnames:
  - "cafe.example.com"
  rules:
  - matches:
    - path:
        type: PathPrefix
        value: /
    backendRefs:
    - name: coffee
      port: 80
EOF
```

To attach the `coffee` HTTPRoute to the `cafe` Gateway, we specify the Gateway name in the `parentRefs` field. The
attachment will succeed if the hostnames and protocol in the HTTPRoute are allowed by at least one of the
Gateway's listeners.

> The `hostnames` field allows you to list the hostnames that the HTTPRoute matches. In this case, incoming requests

Author: Not sure. I'd like to minimize the number of links throughout the doc so that the user can read all the way through without opening extra tabs/windows. 

Is there context that you think we are missing around hostnames and rules?

cc @mpstefan

> The `hostnames` field allows you to list the hostnames that the HTTPRoute matches. In this case, incoming requests

Reviewer 2: I was thinking from the point of view they have an option to view a link, not  that they shall visit it - we don't say, "see this link" explicitly.

but if it is perceived that way, better not overload the user

> The `hostnames` field allows you to list the hostnames that the HTTPRoute matches. In this case, incoming requests

Reviewer: I second the viewpoint that we should give them the option to visit by hyperlinking words. If they already know the context, there's no reason for them to click. If they are confused, they can click on it to get more context.

I see this a lot in the [Kubernetes documentation](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/services-networking/service/) and I really appreciate the references. Otherwise, I'd have to do another Google search to get the full picture for some concepts.

handled by the `http` listener with the HTTP host header `cafe.example.com` will match this HTTPRoute and will be routed
according to the rules in the spec.

The `rules` field defines routing rules for the HTTPRoute. A rule is selected if the request satisfies one of the
rule's `matches`. To forward traffic for all paths to the coffee Service we specify a match with the PathPrefix `/` and
target the coffee Service using the `backendRef` field.

## Test the Configuration

To test the configuration, we will send a request to the public IP and port of NGINX Kubernetes Gateway that you saved
in the [prerequisites](#prerequisites) section and verify that the response comes from one of the coffee Pods.

> **Note**

> > In a production environment, the coffee application would be accessible through the hostname `cafe.example.com`.
> > However, in this guide, we will be accessing the application through the public IP and port of the NGINX Kubernetes
> > Gateway Service and with curl's `--resolve` option.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> In a production environment, your clients should be able to resolve the domain name `cafe.example.com` into the public IP of the NGINX Kubernetes Gateway. In this guide we will simulate that using curl's `--resolve` option.
```

Author: Thanks for the suggestion, this is much better. I think we can use "to" instead of "into" :
> Your clients should be able to resolve the domain name `cafe.example.com` to the public IP of the NGINX Kubernetes Gateway. In this guide we will simulate that using curl's `--resolve` option.

First, let's send a request to the path `/`:

```shell
curl --resolve cafe.example.com:$GW_PORT:$GW_IP http://cafe.example.com:$GW_PORT/
```

We should get a response from one of the coffee Pods:

```text

> Server address: 10.12.0.18:8080

Reviewer 3: Since 8080 is likely your port-forwarded port, should we set this to 80?

Author: The `nginx-hello` container listens on port 8080 so unless we want to use a different image we can't change this.

Server name: coffee-7dd75bc79b-cqvb7
```

Since the `cafe` HTTPRoute routes all traffic on any path to the coffee application, the following requests should also
be handled by the coffee Pods:

```shell
curl --resolve cafe.example.com:$GW_PORT:$GW_IP http://cafe.example.com:$GW_PORT/some-path
```

```text
Server address: 10.12.0.18:8080
Server name: coffee-7dd75bc79b-cqvb7
```

```shell
curl --resolve cafe.example.com:$GW_PORT:$GW_IP http://cafe.example.com:$GW_PORT/some/path
```

```text
Server address: 10.12.0.19:8080
Server name: coffee-7dd75bc79b-dett3

> ```

Reviewer 2: would it make sense to use a different hostname like `pub.example.com` and to show that NKG will return 404 in this case?

Author: Added. Not sure about the wording so let me know what you think

> ## Troubleshooting

Reviewer 2: this section looks like this doc https://github.com/nginxinc/nginx-kubernetes-gateway/issues/551 ;)

Author: I know... once we complete #551 we can link to it in this section. However, the nginx config snippet is specific to the example, so there may still be some benefits to having a troubleshooting guide per example.

  ```shell
  kubectl describe httproute coffee
  ```

  The HTTPRoute status should look similar to this:

  ```text
  Status:
    Parents:
      Conditions:
        Last Transition Time:  2023-08-15T20:57:21Z
        Message:               The route is accepted
        Observed Generation:   1
        Reason:                Accepted
        Status:                True
        Type:                  Accepted
        Last Transition Time:  2023-08-15T20:57:21Z
        Message:               All references are resolved
        Observed Generation:   1
        Reason:                ResolvedRefs
        Status:                True
        Type:                  ResolvedRefs
      Controller Name:         gateway.nginx.org/nginx-gateway-controller
      Parent Ref:
        Group:      gateway.networking.k8s.io
        Kind:       Gateway
        Name:       cafe
        Namespace:  default
  ```

  Check for any error messages in the conditions.

- Check the generated nginx config:

  ```shell
  kubectl exec -it -n nginx-gateway <nginx gateway Pod> -c nginx -- nginx -T
  ```

  The config should contain the following config blocks:

  ```nginx configuration

>   upstream default_coffee_80 {

Reviewer 2: I expect this will change as we evolve NKG generated config. I wonder if there is a good way to prevent the information here from getting outdated?

Author: Good point. I'll rework this and see if I can future-proof it.

Author: Reworked, let me know what you think.

I can also remove this bullet point if it's not helpful or will be too hard to maintain.

    random two least_conn;
    zone default_coffee_80 512k;

    server 10.12.0.18:8080; # these should be the Pod IPs of the coffee Pods
    server 10.12.0.19:8080;
  }
  ...

  server {
    listen 80;

    server_name cafe.example.com;

    location / {

        proxy_set_header Host $gw_api_compliant_host;
        proxy_http_version 1.1;
        proxy_set_header Upgrade $http_upgrade;
        proxy_set_header Connection $connection_upgrade;
        proxy_pass http://default_coffee_80$request_uri;
    }
  }
  ```

> If your issue persists, open an [issue](https://github.com/nginxinc/nginx-kubernetes-gateway/issues/new/choose) in the

Reviewer 2: perhaps we can leverage this section here https://github.com/nginxinc/nginx-kubernetes-gateway#contacts ?

Is opening an issue the only course of action?

Reviewer: I second this. If we ever change our process, we can make a single change on our readme. Could say something like, "If your issue persists, contact us and we can take a look." With "contact us" being the hyperlink above.
